backends/openvino/README.md, before:

# OpenVINO Backend for ExecuTorch
The OpenVINO backend enables optimized execution of deep learning models on Intel hardware, leveraging Intel's [OpenVINO toolkit](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/openvino-toolkit/overview.html) for inference acceleration.

## Supported Hardware

OpenVINO backend supports the following hardware:

- Intel CPUs
- Intel integrated GPUs
- Intel discrete GPUs
- Intel NPUs

For more information on the supported hardware, please refer to [OpenVINO System Requirements](https://docs.openvino.ai/2025/about-openvino/release-notes-openvino/system-requirements.html) page.

## Directory Structure

```
executorch
├── backends
│   └── openvino
│       ├── quantizer
│           ├── observers
│               └── nncf_observers.py
│           ├── __init__.py
│           └── quantizer.py
│       ├── runtime
│           ├── OpenvinoBackend.cpp
│           └── OpenvinoBackend.h
│       ├── scripts
│           └── openvino_build.sh
│       ├── tests
│       ├── CMakeLists.txt
│       ├── README.md
│       ├── __init__.py
│       ├── partitioner.py
│       ├── preprocess.py
│       └── requirements.txt
└── examples
    └── openvino
        ├── aot_optimize_and_infer.py
        └── README.md
```

## Build Instructions

### Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have openvino installed and configured on your system.

### Use OpenVINO from Release Packages

1. Download the OpenVINO release package from [here](https://docs.openvino.ai/2025/get-started/install-openvino.html). Make sure to select your configuration and click on **OpenVINO Archives** under the distribution section to download the appropriate archive for your platform.

2. Extract the release package from the archive and set the environment variables.

   For Linux
   ```bash
   tar -zxf openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>.tgz
   cd openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>
   source setupvars.sh
   ```

   For Windows (Powershell)
   ```powershell
   tar -zxf openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>.zip
   cd openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>
   . ./setupvars.ps1
   ```

### (Optional) Build OpenVINO from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino.git
cd openvino
git submodule update --init --recursive
sudo ./install_build_dependencies.sh
mkdir build && cd build
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DENABLE_PYTHON=ON
make -j$(nproc)

cd ..
cmake --install build --prefix <your_preferred_install_location>
cd <your_preferred_install_location>
source setupvars.sh
```

For more information about OpenVINO build, refer to the [OpenVINO Build Instructions](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/docs/dev/build_linux.md).

### Setup

Follow the steps below to setup your build environment:


1. **Create a Virtual Environment**
- Create a virtual environment and activate it by executing the commands below.
   For Linux
   ```bash
   python -m venv env
   source env/bin/activate
   ```

   For Windows (Powershell)
   ```powershell
   python -m venv env
   env/Scripts/activate
   ```
   
2. **Clone ExecuTorch Repository from Github**
- Clone Executorch repository by executing the command below.
   ```bash
   git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/pytorch/executorch.git
   ```
3. **Build ExecuTorch with OpenVINO Backend**
- The following commands build and install ExecuTorch with the OpenVINO backend, also compiles the C++ runtime libraries and binaries into `<executorch_root>/cmake-out` for quick inference testing.
   ```bash
   # cd to the root of executorch repo
   cd executorch

   # Get a clean cmake-out directory
   ./install_executorch.sh --clean
   mkdir cmake-out

   #Configure cmake
   cmake \
      -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=cmake-out \
      -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXECUTOR_RUNNER=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_DATA_LOADER=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_MODULE=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_TENSOR=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_OPENVINO=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_ENABLE_LOGGING=ON \
      -DPYTHON_EXECUTABLE=python \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_NAMED_DATA_MAP=ON \
      -Bcmake-out .
   
   # We can then build the runtime components with 
   cmake --build cmake-out --target install --config Release
   ```

- Optionally, `openvino_build.sh` script can be used to build python package or C++ libraries/binaries seperately.

   **Build OpenVINO Backend Python Package with Pybindings**: To build and install the OpenVINO backend Python package with Python bindings, run the `openvino_build.sh` script with the `--enable_python` argument as shown in the below command. This will compile and install the ExecuTorch Python package with the OpenVINO backend into your Python environment. This option will also enable python bindings required to execute OpenVINO backend tests and `aot_optimize_and_infer.py` script inside `executorch/examples/openvino` folder.
     ```bash
   ./openvino_build.sh --enable_python
   ```
   **Build C++ Runtime Libraries for OpenVINO Backend**: Run the `openvino_build.sh` script with the `--cpp_runtime` flag to build the C++ runtime libraries as shown in the below command. The compiled libraries files and binaries can be found in the `<executorch_root>/cmake-out` directory. The binary located at `<executorch_root>/cmake-out/executor_runner` can be used to run inference with vision models.
     ```bash
   ./openvino_build.sh --cpp_runtime
   ```
   **Build C++ Llama Runner**: First, ensure the C++ runtime libraries are built by following the earlier instructions. Then, run the `openvino_build.sh` script with the `--llama_runner flag` to compile the LlaMA runner as shown the below command, which enables executing inference with models exported using export_llama. The resulting binary is located at: `<executorch_root>/cmake-out/examples/models/llama/llama_main`
     ```bash
   ./openvino_build.sh --llama_runner
   ```

For more information about ExecuTorch environment setup, refer to the [Environment Setup](https://pytorch.org/executorch/main/getting-started-setup#environment-setup) guide.

### Run

Please refer to [README.md](../../examples/openvino/README.md) for instructions on running examples of various of models with openvino backend.

Commit message:

Added additional step for windows build

backends/openvino/README.md, after:

# OpenVINO Backend for ExecuTorch
The OpenVINO backend enables optimized execution of deep learning models on Intel hardware, leveraging Intel's [OpenVINO toolkit](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/openvino-toolkit/overview.html) for inference acceleration.

## Supported Hardware

OpenVINO backend supports the following hardware:

- Intel CPUs
- Intel integrated GPUs
- Intel discrete GPUs
- Intel NPUs

For more information on the supported hardware, please refer to [OpenVINO System Requirements](https://docs.openvino.ai/2025/about-openvino/release-notes-openvino/system-requirements.html) page.

## Directory Structure

```
executorch
├── backends
│   └── openvino
│       ├── quantizer
│           ├── observers
│               └── nncf_observers.py
│           ├── __init__.py
│           └── quantizer.py
│       ├── runtime
│           ├── OpenvinoBackend.cpp
│           └── OpenvinoBackend.h
│       ├── scripts
│           └── openvino_build.sh
│       ├── tests
│       ├── CMakeLists.txt
│       ├── README.md
│       ├── __init__.py
│       ├── partitioner.py
│       ├── preprocess.py
│       └── requirements.txt
└── examples
    └── openvino
        ├── aot_optimize_and_infer.py
        └── README.md
```

## Build Instructions

### Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have openvino installed and configured on your system.

### Use OpenVINO from Release Packages

1. Download the OpenVINO release package from [here](https://docs.openvino.ai/2025/get-started/install-openvino.html). Make sure to select your configuration and click on **OpenVINO Archives** under the distribution section to download the appropriate archive for your platform.

2. Extract the release package from the archive and set the environment variables.

   For Linux
   ```bash
   tar -zxf openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>.tgz
   cd openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>
   source setupvars.sh
   ```

   For Windows (Powershell)
   ```powershell
   tar -zxf openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>.zip
   cd openvino_toolkit_<your_release_configuration>
   . ./setupvars.ps1
   ```

### (Optional) Build OpenVINO from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino.git
cd openvino
git submodule update --init --recursive
sudo ./install_build_dependencies.sh
mkdir build && cd build
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DENABLE_PYTHON=ON
make -j$(nproc)

cd ..
cmake --install build --prefix <your_preferred_install_location>
cd <your_preferred_install_location>
source setupvars.sh
```

For more information about OpenVINO build, refer to the [OpenVINO Build Instructions](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino/blob/master/docs/dev/build_linux.md).

### Setup

Follow the steps below to setup your build environment:

1. **Create a Virtual Environment**
- Create a virtual environment and activate it by executing the commands below.
   For Linux
   ```bash
   python -m venv env
   source env/bin/activate
   ```

   For Windows (Powershell)
   ```powershell
   python -m venv env
   env/Scripts/activate
   ```
   
2. **Clone ExecuTorch Repository from Github**
- Clone Executorch repository by executing the command below.
   -  On windows, make sure to enable symlinks before cloning. Refer to [Building from Source](https://docs.pytorch.org/executorch/main/using-executorch-building-from-source.html#environment-setup) for more details.
   ```bash
   git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/pytorch/executorch.git
   ```
3. **Build ExecuTorch with OpenVINO Backend**
- The following commands build and install ExecuTorch with the OpenVINO backend, also compiles the C++ runtime libraries and binaries into `<executorch_root>/cmake-out` for quick inference testing.
   ```bash
   # cd to the root of executorch repo
   cd executorch

   # Get a clean cmake-out directory
   ./install_executorch.sh --clean
   mkdir cmake-out

   #Configure cmake
   cmake \
      -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=cmake-out \
      -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXECUTOR_RUNNER=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_DATA_LOADER=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_MODULE=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_TENSOR=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_OPENVINO=ON \
      -DEXECUTORCH_ENABLE_LOGGING=ON \
      -DPYTHON_EXECUTABLE=python \
      -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_NAMED_DATA_MAP=ON \
      -Bcmake-out .
   
   # We can then build the runtime components with 
   cmake --build cmake-out --target install --config Release
   ```

- Optionally, `openvino_build.sh` script can be used to build python package or C++ libraries/binaries seperately.

   **Build OpenVINO Backend Python Package with Pybindings**: To build and install the OpenVINO backend Python package with Python bindings, run the `openvino_build.sh` script with the `--enable_python` argument as shown in the below command. This will compile and install the ExecuTorch Python package with the OpenVINO backend into your Python environment. This option will also enable python bindings required to execute OpenVINO backend tests and `aot_optimize_and_infer.py` script inside `executorch/examples/openvino` folder.
     ```bash
   ./openvino_build.sh --enable_python
   ```
   **Build C++ Runtime Libraries for OpenVINO Backend**: Run the `openvino_build.sh` script with the `--cpp_runtime` flag to build the C++ runtime libraries as shown in the below command. The compiled libraries files and binaries can be found in the `<executorch_root>/cmake-out` directory. The binary located at `<executorch_root>/cmake-out/executor_runner` can be used to run inference with vision models.
     ```bash
   ./openvino_build.sh --cpp_runtime
   ```
   **Build C++ Llama Runner**: First, ensure the C++ runtime libraries are built by following the earlier instructions. Then, run the `openvino_build.sh` script with the `--llama_runner flag` to compile the LlaMA runner as shown the below command, which enables executing inference with models exported using export_llama. The resulting binary is located at: `<executorch_root>/cmake-out/examples/models/llama/llama_main`
     ```bash
   ./openvino_build.sh --llama_runner
   ```

For more information about ExecuTorch environment setup, refer to the [Environment Setup](https://pytorch.org/executorch/main/getting-started-setup#environment-setup) guide.

### Run

Please refer to [README.md](../../examples/openvino/README.md) for instructions on running examples of various of models with openvino backend.
