docs/source/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-overview.md, before:

# Arm VGF Backend

The Arm&reg; VGF backend is the ExecuTorch solution for lowering PyTorch models to VGF compatible hardware.
It leverages the TOSA operator set and the [ML SDK for Vulkan&reg;](https://github.com/arm/ai-ml-sdk-for-vulkan?tab=readme-ov-file) to produce a .PTE file.
The VGF backend also supports execution from a .PTE file and provides functionality to extract the corresponding VGF file for integration into various applications.

## Features

- Wide operator support for delegating large parts of models to the VGF target.
- A quantizer that optimizes quantization for the VGF target.

## Target Requirements

The target system must include ML SDK for Vulkan and a Vulkan driver with Vulkan API >= 1.3.

## Development Requirements

```{tip}
All requirements can be downloaded using `examples/arm/setup.sh --enable-mlsdk-deps --disable-ethos-u-deps` and added to the path using
`source examples/arm/arm-scratch/setup_path.sh`
```

For the AOT flow, compilation of a model to `.pte` format using the VGF backend, the requirements are:
- [TOSA Serialization Library](https://www.mlplatform.org/tosa/software.html) for serializing the Exir IR graph into TOSA IR.
- [ML SDK Model Converter](https://github.com/arm/ai-ml-sdk-model-converter) for converting TOSA flatbuffers to VGF files.

And for building and running your application using the generic executor_runner:
- [Vulkan API](https://www.vulkan.org) should be set up locally for GPU execution support.
- [ML Emulation Layer for Vulkan](https://github.com/arm/ai-ml-emulation-layer-for-vulkan) for testing on Vulkan API.

## Using the Arm VGF Backend

The [VGF Minimal Example](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/examples/arm/vgf_minimal_example.ipynb) demonstrates how to lower a module using the VGF backend.

The main configuration point for the lowering is the `VgfCompileSpec` consumed by the partitioner and quantizer.
The full user-facing API is documented below.

```python
class VgfCompileSpec(tosa_spec: executorch.backends.arm.tosa.specification.TosaSpecification | str | None = None, compiler_flags: list[str] | None = None)
```
Compile spec for VGF compatible targets.

Args:
- **tosa_spec**: TOSA specification that should be targeted.
- **compiler_flags**: Extra compiler flags for converter_backend.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.dump_debug_info(self, debug_mode: executorch.backends.arm.common.arm_compile_spec.ArmCompileSpec.DebugMode | None):
```
Dump debugging information into the intermediates path.

Args:
- **debug_mode**: The debug mode to use for dumping debug information.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.dump_intermediate_artifacts_to(self, output_path: str | None):
```
Sets a path for dumping intermediate results during such as tosa and pte.

Args:
- **output_path**: Path to dump intermediate results to.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.get_intermediate_path(self) -> str | None:
```
Gets the path used for dumping intermediate results such as tosa and pte.

Returns:
    Path where intermediate results are saved.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.get_output_format() -> str:
```
Returns a constant string that is the output format of the class.



### Partitioner API

See [Partitioner API](arm-vgf-partitioner.md) for more information of the Partitioner API.

## Quantization

The VGF quantizer supports [Post Training Quantization (PT2E)](https://docs.pytorch.org/ao/main/tutorials_source/pt2e_quant_ptq.html)
and [Quantization-Aware Training (QAT)](https://docs.pytorch.org/ao/main/tutorials_source/pt2e_quant_qat.html).

For more information on quantization, see [Quantization](arm-vgf-quantization.md).

## Runtime Integration

The VGF backend can use the default ExecuTorch runner. The steps required for building and running it are explained in the [VGF Backend Tutorial](tutorials/vgf-getting-started.md).
The example application is recommended to use for testing basic functionality of your lowered models, as well as a starting point for developing runtime integrations for your own targets.

## Reference

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-partitioner` — Partitioner options.**

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-quantization` — Supported quantization schemes.**

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-troubleshooting` — Debug common issues.**

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/tutorials/arm-vgf-tutorials` — Tutorials.**


```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 2
:hidden:
:caption: Arm VGF Backend

arm-vgf-partitioner
arm-vgf-quantization
arm-vgf-troubleshooting
tutorials/arm-vgf-tutorials
```

Commit message:

Arm backend: Update docs to mention partial quantization
VGF has now support for partial quantization, i.e., having the model run
in mixed numerical precision. Update the markdown documentation to
include and explain this feature.

Signed-off-by: Martin Lindström <Martin.Lindstroem@arm.com>
Change-Id: I3b4088030d8739e8565152926100cb52c11f26f5

docs/source/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-overview.md, after:

# Arm VGF Backend

The Arm&reg; VGF backend is the ExecuTorch solution for lowering PyTorch models to VGF compatible hardware.
It leverages the TOSA operator set and the [ML SDK for Vulkan&reg;](https://github.com/arm/ai-ml-sdk-for-vulkan?tab=readme-ov-file) to produce a .PTE file.
The VGF backend also supports execution from a .PTE file and provides functionality to extract the corresponding VGF file for integration into various applications.

## Features

- Wide operator support for delegating large parts of models to the VGF target.
- A quantizer that optimizes quantization for the VGF target.

## Target Requirements

The target system must include ML SDK for Vulkan and a Vulkan driver with Vulkan API >= 1.3.

## Development Requirements

```{tip}
All requirements can be downloaded using `examples/arm/setup.sh --enable-mlsdk-deps --disable-ethos-u-deps` and added to the path using
`source examples/arm/arm-scratch/setup_path.sh`
```

For the AOT flow, compilation of a model to `.pte` format using the VGF backend, the requirements are:
- [TOSA Serialization Library](https://www.mlplatform.org/tosa/software.html) for serializing the Exir IR graph into TOSA IR.
- [ML SDK Model Converter](https://github.com/arm/ai-ml-sdk-model-converter) for converting TOSA flatbuffers to VGF files.

And for building and running your application using the generic executor_runner:
- [Vulkan API](https://www.vulkan.org) should be set up locally for GPU execution support.
- [ML Emulation Layer for Vulkan](https://github.com/arm/ai-ml-emulation-layer-for-vulkan) for testing on Vulkan API.

## Using the Arm VGF Backend

The [VGF Minimal Example](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/examples/arm/vgf_minimal_example.ipynb) demonstrates how to lower a module using the VGF backend.

The main configuration point for the lowering is the `VgfCompileSpec` consumed by the partitioner and quantizer.
The full user-facing API is documented below.

```python
class VgfCompileSpec(tosa_spec: executorch.backends.arm.tosa.specification.TosaSpecification | str | None = None, compiler_flags: list[str] | None = None)
```
Compile spec for VGF compatible targets.

Args:
- **tosa_spec**: TOSA specification that should be targeted.
- **compiler_flags**: Extra compiler flags for converter_backend.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.dump_debug_info(self, debug_mode: executorch.backends.arm.common.arm_compile_spec.ArmCompileSpec.DebugMode | None):
```
Dump debugging information into the intermediates path.

Args:
- **debug_mode**: The debug mode to use for dumping debug information.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.dump_intermediate_artifacts_to(self, output_path: str | None):
```
Sets a path for dumping intermediate results during such as tosa and pte.

Args:
- **output_path**: Path to dump intermediate results to.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.get_intermediate_path(self) -> str | None:
```
Gets the path used for dumping intermediate results such as tosa and pte.

Returns:
    Path where intermediate results are saved.

```python
def VgfCompileSpec.get_output_format() -> str:
```
Returns a constant string that is the output format of the class.



### Partitioner API

See [Partitioner API](arm-vgf-partitioner.md) for more information of the Partitioner API.

## Quantization

The VGF quantizer supports [Post Training Quantization (PT2E)](https://docs.pytorch.org/ao/main/tutorials_source/pt2e_quant_ptq.html)
and [Quantization-Aware Training (QAT)](https://docs.pytorch.org/ao/main/tutorials_source/pt2e_quant_qat.html).

Partial quantization is supported, allowing users to quantize only specific parts of the model while leaving others in floating-point.

For more information on quantization, see [Quantization](arm-vgf-quantization.md).

## Runtime Integration

The VGF backend can use the default ExecuTorch runner. The steps required for building and running it are explained in the [VGF Backend Tutorial](tutorials/vgf-getting-started.md).
The example application is recommended to use for testing basic functionality of your lowered models, as well as a starting point for developing runtime integrations for your own targets.

## Reference

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-partitioner` — Partitioner options.**

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-quantization` — Supported quantization schemes.**

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/arm-vgf-troubleshooting` — Debug common issues.**

**→{doc}`/backends/arm-vgf/tutorials/arm-vgf-tutorials` — Tutorials.**


```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 2
:hidden:
:caption: Arm VGF Backend

arm-vgf-partitioner
arm-vgf-quantization
arm-vgf-troubleshooting
tutorials/arm-vgf-tutorials
```
