docs/source/backends/arm-ethos-u/arm-ethos-u-quantization.md, before:

# Quantization

The Arm Ethos-U delegate only supports the execution of quantized models. To quantize a model so that is supported by this delegate, the `EthosUQuantizer` should be used.

Currently, the symmetric `int8` config defined by `executorch.backends.arm.quantizer.arm_quantizer.get_symmetric_quantization_config` is the main config available to use with the Ethos-U quantizer.

### Supported Quantization Schemes

The Arm Ethos-U delegate supports the following quantization schemes:

- 8-bit symmetric weights with 8-bit asymmetric activations (via the PT2E quantization flow).
- Limited support for 16-bit quantization with 16-bit activations and 8-bit weights (a.k.a 16x8 quantization). This is under development.

### Quantization API

```python
class EthosUQuantizer(compile_spec: 'EthosUCompileSpec') -> 'None'
```
Quantizer supported by the Arm Ethos-U backend.

Args:
- **compile_spec (EthosUCompileSpec)**: Backend compile specification for
        Ethos-U targets.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.quantize_with_submodules(self, model: 'GraphModule', calibration_samples: 'list[tuple]', is_qat: 'bool' = False):
```
Quantizes a GraphModule in a way such that conditional submodules are handled properly.

Args:
- **model (GraphModule)**: The model to quantize.
- **calibration_samples (list[tuple])**: A list of inputs to used to
        calibrate the model during quantization. To properly calibrate a
        model with submodules, at least one sample per code path is
        needed.
- **is_qat (bool)**: Whether to do quantization aware training or not.

Returns:
- **GraphModule**: The quantized model.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_global(self, quantization_config: 'QuantizationConfig') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for submodules not matched by other filters.

Args:
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration to apply to
        modules that are not captured by name or type filters.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_io(self, quantization_config: 'QuantizationConfig') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for input and output nodes.

Args:
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration describing
        activation quantization for model inputs and outputs.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_module_name(self, module_name: 'str', quantization_config: 'Optional[QuantizationConfig]') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for submodules with a given module name.

For example, calling set_module_name("blocks.sub") quantizes supported
patterns for that submodule with the provided quantization_config.

Args:
- **module_name (str)**: Fully qualified module name to configure.
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration to apply to
        the named submodule.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_module_type(self, module_type: 'Callable', quantization_config: 'QuantizationConfig') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for submodules with a given module type.

For example, calling set_module_type(Sub) quantizes supported patterns
in each Sub instance with the provided quantization_config.

Args:
- **module_type (Callable)**: Type whose submodules should use the
        provided quantization configuration.
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration to apply to
        submodules of the given type.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.transform_for_annotation(self, model: 'GraphModule') -> 'GraphModule':
```
Transform the graph to prepare it for quantization annotation.

Currently transforms scalar values to tensor attributes.

Args:
- **model (GraphModule)**: Model whose graph will be transformed.

Returns:
- **GraphModule**: Transformed model prepared for annotation.

Commit message:

Arm backend: Update docs to mention partial quantization
VGF has now support for partial quantization, i.e., having the model run
in mixed numerical precision. Update the markdown documentation to
include and explain this feature.

Signed-off-by: Martin Lindström <Martin.Lindstroem@arm.com>
Change-Id: I3b4088030d8739e8565152926100cb52c11f26f5

docs/source/backends/arm-ethos-u/arm-ethos-u-quantization.md, after:

# Quantization

The Arm Ethos-U delegate only supports the execution of quantized models. To quantize a model so that is supported by this delegate, the `EthosUQuantizer` should be used.

Currently, the symmetric `int8` config defined by `executorch.backends.arm.quantizer.arm_quantizer.get_symmetric_quantization_config` is the main config available to use with the Ethos-U quantizer.

### Supported Quantization Schemes

The Arm Ethos-U delegate supports the following quantization schemes:

- 8-bit symmetric weights with 8-bit asymmetric activations (via the PT2E quantization flow).
- Limited support for 16-bit quantization with 16-bit activations and 8-bit weights (a.k.a 16x8 quantization). This is under development.
- Partial quantization is *not* supported on the Ethos-U backend. The entire model must be quantized.

### Quantization API

```python
class EthosUQuantizer(compile_spec: 'EthosUCompileSpec') -> 'None'
```
Quantizer supported by the Arm Ethos-U backend.

Args:
- **compile_spec (EthosUCompileSpec)**: Backend compile specification for
        Ethos-U targets.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.quantize_with_submodules(self, model: 'GraphModule', calibration_samples: 'list[tuple]', is_qat: 'bool' = False):
```
Quantizes a GraphModule in a way such that conditional submodules are handled properly.

Args:
- **model (GraphModule)**: The model to quantize.
- **calibration_samples (list[tuple])**: A list of inputs to used to
        calibrate the model during quantization. To properly calibrate a
        model with submodules, at least one sample per code path is
        needed.
- **is_qat (bool)**: Whether to do quantization aware training or not.

Returns:
- **GraphModule**: The quantized model.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_global(self, quantization_config: 'QuantizationConfig') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for submodules not matched by other filters.

Args:
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration to apply to
        modules that are not captured by name or type filters.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_io(self, quantization_config: 'QuantizationConfig') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for input and output nodes.

Args:
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration describing
        activation quantization for model inputs and outputs.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_module_name(self, module_name: 'str', quantization_config: 'Optional[QuantizationConfig]') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for submodules with a given module name.

For example, calling set_module_name("blocks.sub") quantizes supported
patterns for that submodule with the provided quantization_config.

Args:
- **module_name (str)**: Fully qualified module name to configure.
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration to apply to
        the named submodule.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.set_module_type(self, module_type: 'Callable', quantization_config: 'QuantizationConfig') -> 'TOSAQuantizer':
```
Set quantization_config for submodules with a given module type.

For example, calling set_module_type(Sub) quantizes supported patterns
in each Sub instance with the provided quantization_config.

Args:
- **module_type (Callable)**: Type whose submodules should use the
        provided quantization configuration.
- **quantization_config (QuantizationConfig)**: Configuration to apply to
        submodules of the given type.

```python
def EthosUQuantizer.transform_for_annotation(self, model: 'GraphModule') -> 'GraphModule':
```
Transform the graph to prepare it for quantization annotation.

Currently transforms scalar values to tensor attributes.

Args:
- **model (GraphModule)**: Model whose graph will be transformed.

Returns:
- **GraphModule**: Transformed model prepared for annotation.
