docs/source/backends-cadence.md, before:

# Cadence Xtensa Backend


In this tutorial we will walk you through the process of getting setup to build ExecuTorch for Cadence Xtensa DSPs and running models on them.

[Cadence](https://www.cadence.com/en_US/home.html) is both a hardware and software vendor, providing solutions for many computational workloads, including to run on power-limited embedded devices. The Cadence backend supports multiple DSP families optimized for different workloads:
- **HiFi Audio DSPs** (HiFi4/HiFi5): Optimized for audio processing, speech recognition, and wake word detection
- **Fusion G3 DSPs**: General-purpose AI acceleration
- **Vision P-Series DSPs**: Specialized for computer vision and CNN workloads

In addition to the chip, the HiFi4 Neural Network Library ([nnlib](https://github.com/foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4)) offers an optimized set of library functions commonly used in NN processing that we utilize in this example to demonstrate how common operations can be accelerated.

On top of being able to run on the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP, another goal of this tutorial is to demonstrate how portable ExecuTorch is and its ability to run on a low-power embedded device such as the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP. This workflow does not require any delegates, it uses custom operators and compiler passes to enhance the model and make it more suitable to running on Xtensa HiFi4 DSPs. A custom [quantizer](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/quantization_in_pytorch_2_0_export_tutorial.html) is used to represent activations and weights as `uint8` instead of `float`, and call appropriate operators. Finally, custom kernels optimized with Xtensa intrinsics provide runtime acceleration.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item-card}  What you will learn in this tutorial:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
* In this tutorial you will learn how to export a quantized model with a linear operation targeted for the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP.
* You will also learn how to compile and deploy the ExecuTorch runtime with the kernels required for running the quantized model generated in the previous step on the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP.
:::
:::{grid-item-card}  Tutorials we recommend you complete before this:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
* [Introduction to ExecuTorch](intro-how-it-works.md)
* [Getting Started](getting-started.md)
* [Building ExecuTorch with CMake](using-executorch-building-from-source.md)
:::
::::

```{note}
The linux part of this tutorial has been designed and tested on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, and requires glibc 2.34. Workarounds are available for other distributions, but will not be covered in this tutorial.
```

## Prerequisites (Hardware and Software)

In order to be able to succesfully build and run ExecuTorch on a Xtensa HiFi4 DSP you'll need the following hardware and software components.

### Hardware
 - [i.MX RT600 Evaluation Kit](https://www.nxp.com/design/development-boards/i-mx-evaluation-and-development-boards/i-mx-rt600-evaluation-kit:MIMXRT685-EVK)

### Software
 - x86-64 Linux system (For compiling the DSP binaries)
 - [MCUXpresso IDE](https://www.nxp.com/design/software/development-software/mcuxpresso-software-and-tools-/mcuxpresso-integrated-development-environment-ide:MCUXpresso-IDE)
    - This IDE is supported on multiple platforms including MacOS. You can use it on any of the supported platforms as you'll only be using this to flash the board with the DSP images that you'll be building later on in this tutorial.
- [J-Link](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/)
    - Needed to flash the board with the firmware images. You can install this on the same platform that you installed the MCUXpresso IDE on.
    - Note: depending on the version of the NXP board, another probe than JLink might be installed. In any case, flashing is done using the MCUXpresso IDE in a similar way.
 - [MCUXpresso SDK](https://mcuxpresso.nxp.com/en/select?device=EVK-MIMXRT685)
    - Download this SDK to your Linux machine, extract it and take a note of the path where you store it. You'll need this later.
- [Xtensa compiler](https://tensilicatools.com/platform/i-mx-rt600/)
    - Download this to your Linux machine. This is needed to build ExecuTorch for the HiFi4 DSP.
- For cases with optimized kernels, the [nnlib repo](https://github.com/foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4).

## Setting up Developer Environment

Step 1. In order to be able to successfully install all the software components specified above users will need to go through the NXP tutorial linked below. Although the tutorial itself walks through a Windows setup, most of the steps translate over to a Linux installation too.

[NXP tutorial on setting up the board and dev environment](https://www.nxp.com/document/guide/getting-started-with-i-mx-rt600-evaluation-kit:GS-MIMXRT685-EVK?section=plug-it-in)

```{note}
Before proceeding forward to the next section users should be able to succesfullly flash the **dsp_mu_polling_cm33** sample application from the tutorial above and notice output on the UART console indicating that the Cortex-M33 and HiFi4 DSP are talking to each other.
```

Step 2. Make sure you have completed the ExecuTorch setup tutorials linked to at the top of this page.

## Working Tree Description

The working tree is:

```
executorch
├── backends
│   └── cadence
│       ├── aot                      # Ahead-of-Time compilation tools
│       │   ├── compiler.py         # Main compilation API
│       │   ├── export_example.py   # Export workflow example
│       │   ├── quantizer/          # Quantization infrastructure
│       │   │   ├── quantizer.py    # Multiple quantizer implementations
│       │   │   ├── patterns.py     # Quantization patterns
│       │   │   └── fusion_pass.py  # Op fusion pass
│       │   ├── passes.py           # Graph optimization passes
│       │   ├── functions.yaml      # Generic operator definitions
│       │   ├── functions_hifi.yaml # HiFi-specific definitions
│       │   ├── functions_fusion_g3.yaml # Fusion G3 definitions
│       │   └── functions_vision.yaml # Vision-specific definitions
│       ├── runtime/                # Runtime execution infrastructure
│       ├── utils/                  # Build utilities (FACTO, header gen)
│       ├── hifi/                   # HiFi Audio DSP family (70+ ops)
│       │   ├── kernels            # Optimized HiFi4/HiFi5 kernels
│       │   ├── operators          # HiFi operator implementations
│       │   └── third-party
│       │       └── nnlib          # Cadence NNLIB integration
│       ├── fusion_g3/             # Fusion G3 DSP family (25+ ops)
│       │   ├── kernels
│       │   ├── operators
│       │   └── third-party
│       │       └── nnlib
│       ├── vision/                # Vision P-Series DSP family (17+ ops)
│       │   ├── kernels
│       │   ├── operators
│       │   └── third-party        # Vision-specific library
│       └── generic/               # Generic fallback implementations (15+ ops)
│           └── operators
└── examples
    └── cadence
        ├── models                 # 9 example models
        │   ├── rnnt_encoder.py   # ASR encoder (ConvEmformer)
        │   ├── rnnt_predictor.py # ASR predictor
        │   ├── rnnt_joiner.py    # ASR joiner
        │   ├── wav2vec2.py       # Self-supervised speech
        │   ├── mobilenet_v2.py   # Image classification
        │   ├── resnet18.py       # Image classification
        │   ├── resnet50.py       # Image classification
        │   ├── vision_transformer.py # ViT
        │   └── babyllama.py      # Small LLM
        └── operators             # Operator test examples
            ├── test_add_op.py    # Add operation tests
            ├── test_quantized_linear_op.py
            ├── test_quantized_conv1d_op.py
            ├── test_requantize_op.py
            └── test_g3_ops.py    # FACTO-based G3 tests
```

***AoT (Ahead-of-Time) Components***:

The AoT folder contains all of the python scripts and functions needed to export the model to an ExecuTorch `.pte` file. The main components include:

- **Compiler API** ([compiler.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/compiler.py)): High-level APIs for model compilation including `trace()`, `quantize_pt2()`, `export_to_edge()`, and `export_to_cadence()`.

- **Quantizer** ([quantizer/quantizer.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/quantizer/quantizer.py)): Multiple quantization strategies:
  - `CadenceDefaultQuantizer`: Standard A8W8 (8-bit asymmetric activations, 8-bit weights)
  - `CadenceWithLayerNormQuantizer`: Adds layer normalization support
  - `CadenceWakeWordQuantizer`: Optimized for audio wake word models
  - `CadenceW8A32MixedQuantizer`: Experimental mixed precision (8-bit weights, 32-bit activations)
  - `CadenceWithSoftmaxQuantizer`: Includes A16 (16-bit activation) softmax

- **Compiler Passes** ([passes.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/passes.py)): Graph optimization passes including operator fusion, replacement, simplification, and reordering.

- **Operator Registrations** ([ops_registrations.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/ops_registrations.py)): Registers 100+ custom Cadence operators with meta kernels for shape inference. Supports quantized operations for conv1d/2d, linear, matmul, layer norm, and more.

- **Export Example** ([export_example.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/export_example.py)): Reference implementation demonstrating the complete export workflow from model to `.pte` file.

***DSP Family-Specific Implementations***:

Each DSP family has its own optimized operator and kernel implementations:

- **HiFi**: Extensive support for quantized convolutions (1D/2D, depthwise, dilated), linear, matmul, layer norm, ReLU, add, and more. Uses Cadence NNLIB for optimized primitives.

- **Fusion G3**: General-purpose operations including arithmetic (add, sub, mul, div), activations (sigmoid, tanh, softmax), layer normalization, and tensor manipulation.

- **Vision**: Vision-focused operations including quantized conv, linear, matmul, im2row transformation, and softmax with custom vision library.

- **Generic**: Reference implementations used as fallback when DSP-specific optimizations aren't available.

***Kernels***:

The kernels folders contain optimized implementations that use Xtensa intrinsics to deliver high performance at low power. Each DSP family has its own kernel implementations tuned for the specific architecture characteristics.

## Build

In this step, you will generate the ExecuTorch program from different models. You'll then use this Program (the `.pte` file) during the runtime build step to bake this Program into the DSP image.

### Model Export Examples

The Cadence backend provides multiple example models covering different use cases:

***Simple Model***:

The first, simple model is meant to test that all components of this tutorial are working properly, and simply does an add operation. The generated file is called `add.pte`.

```bash
cd executorch
python3 -m examples.portable.scripts.export --model_name="add"
```

***Quantized Operators***:

Test individual quantized operations:

- **Quantized Linear**: [Linear](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Linear.html) operation (32→16 features). Linear is the backbone of most ASR models.
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.operators.test_quantized_linear_op
  ```

- **Quantized Conv1D**: [Conv1d](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Conv1d.html) operation (8→16 channels). Important for wake word and denoising models.
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.operators.test_quantized_conv1d_op
  ```

- **Requantize Operation**: Tests dtype conversion between different quantized types.
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.operators.test_requantize_op
  ```

In all cases the generated file is called `CadenceDemoModel.pte`.

***Speech/Audio Models***:

The torchaudio [RNNT-emformer](https://pytorch.org/audio/stable/tutorials/online_asr_tutorial.html) model is an Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) model, comprised of three different submodels:

- **RNNT Predictor**: Sequence of basic ops (embedding, ReLU, linear, layer norm)
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.rnnt_predictor
  ```

- **RNNT Encoder**: ConvEmformer-based encoder with time reduction and transformer layers
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.rnnt_encoder
  ```

- **RNNT Joiner**: Joint network combining encoder and predictor outputs
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.rnnt_joiner
  ```

- **Wav2Vec 2.0**: Self-supervised speech representation model
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.wav2vec2
  ```

***Computer Vision Models***:

- **MobileNet V2**: Efficient image classification
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.mobilenet_v2
  ```

- **ResNet-18**: Image classification
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.resnet18
  ```

- **ResNet-50**: Deeper image classification
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.resnet50
  ```

- **Vision Transformer (ViT)**: Transformer-based vision model
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.vision_transformer
  ```

***Language Model***:

- **Baby LLaMA**: Small LLM for testing transformer operations on DSP
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.babyllama
  ```

All model exports generate `CadenceDemoModel.pte` files ready for deployment.

### Runtime

**Building the DSP firmware image**
In this step, you'll be building the DSP firmware image that consists of the sample ExecuTorch runner along with the Program generated from the previous step. This image when loaded onto the DSP will run through the model that this Program consists of.

***Step 1***. Configure the environment variables needed to point to the Xtensa toolchain that you have installed in the previous step. The three environment variables that need to be set include:
```bash
# Directory in which the Xtensa toolchain was installed
export XTENSA_TOOLCHAIN=/home/user_name/cadence/XtDevTools/install/tools
# The version of the toolchain that was installed. This is essentially the name of the directory
# that is present in the XTENSA_TOOLCHAIN directory from above.
export TOOLCHAIN_VER=RI-2023.11-linux
# The Xtensa core that you're targeting.
# For HiFi4 (NXP RT600):
export XTENSA_CORE=VANILLA_HIFI
# For Fusion G3:
# export XTENSA_CORE=VANILLA_G3
# For Vision P6:
# export XTENSA_CORE=VANILLA_VISION
```

```{note}
The Cadence backend supports multiple DSP families:
- **HiFi Audio DSPs** (HiFi4/HiFi5): Core `VANILLA_HIFI`, enable with `-DEXECUTORCH_NNLIB_OPT=ON`
- **Fusion G3 DSPs**: Core `VANILLA_G3`, enable with `-DEXECUTORCH_FUSION_G3_OPT=ON`
- **Vision P-Series DSPs**: Core `VANILLA_VISION`, enable with `-DEXECUTORCH_VISION_OPT=ON`
```

***Step 2***. Clone the [nnlib repo](https://github.com/foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4), which contains optimized kernels and primitives for HiFi4 DSPs, with `git clone git@github.com:foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4.git`.

***Step 3***. Run the CMake build.
In order to run the CMake build, you need the path to the following:
- The Program generated in the previous step
- Path to the NXP SDK root. This should have been installed already in the [Setting up Developer Environment](#setting-up-developer-environment) section. This is the directory that contains the folders such as boards, components, devices, and other.

```bash
cd executorch
./install_executorch.sh --clean
mkdir cmake-out
# prebuild and install executorch library
cmake -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=<path_to_executorch>/backends/cadence/cadence.cmake \
    -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=cmake-out \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug \
    -DPYTHON_EXECUTABLE=python3 \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_RUNNER_UTIL=ON \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXECUTOR_RUNNER=OFF \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_PTHREADPOOL=OFF \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_CPUINFO=OFF \
    -Bcmake-out .

cmake --build cmake-out -j<num_cores> --target install --config Debug
# build cadence runner
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug \
    -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=<path_to_executorch>/examples/backends/cadence.cmake \
    -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=<path_to_executorch>/cmake-out \
    -DMODEL_PATH=<path_to_program_file_generated_in_previous_step> \
    -DNXP_SDK_ROOT_DIR=<path_to_nxp_sdk_root> \
    -DNN_LIB_BASE_DIR=<path_to_nnlib_cloned_in_step_2> \
    -Bcmake-out/examples/cadence \
    examples/cadence

cmake --build cmake-out/examples/cadence -j8 -t cadence_executorch_example
```

After having succesfully run the above step you should see two binary files in their CMake output directory.
```bash
> ls cmake-xt/*.bin
cmake-xt/dsp_data_release.bin  cmake-xt/dsp_text_release.bin
```

## Deploying and Running on Device

***Step 1***. You now take the DSP binary images generated from the previous step and copy them over into your NXP workspace created in the [Setting up  Developer Environment](#setting-up-developer-environment) section. Copy the DSP images into the `dsp_binary` section highlighted in the image below.

![MCUXpresso IDE](_static/img/dsp_binary.png)

```{note}
As long as binaries have been built using the Xtensa toolchain on Linux, flashing the board and running on the chip can be done only with the MCUXpresso IDE, which is available on all platforms (Linux, MacOS, Windows).
```

***Step 2***. Clean your work space

***Step 3***. Click **Debug your Project** which will flash the board with your binaries.

On the UART console connected to your board (at a default baud rate of 115200), you should see an output similar to this:

```bash
> screen /dev/tty.usbmodem0007288234991 115200
Executed model
Model executed successfully.
First 20 elements of output 0
0.165528   0.331055 ...
```

## Conclusion and Future Work

In this tutorial, you have learned how to export a quantized operation, build the ExecuTorch runtime and run this model on the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP chip.

The (quantized linear) model in this tutorial is a typical operation appearing in ASR models, and can be extended to a complete ASR model by creating the model as a new test and adding the needed operators/kernels to [operators](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/hifi/operators) and [kernels](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/hifi/kernels).

Other models can be created following the same structure, always assuming that operators and kernels are available.

Commit message:

Update documentation with new ecosystem integrations, demos, and resource links
docs/source/success-stories.md

1. Added Arm ML Embedded Evaluation Kit to Ecosystem Integrations (Cortex-M, Ethos-U NPUs)
2. Added Whisper to Featured Demos (CUDA and Metal backends)
3. Added Audio Generation demo (Stable Audio Open Small on Arm CPUs with KleidiAI)
4. Added YouTube video link to Audio Generation demo
5. Added Alif Semiconductor Ensemble to Ecosystem Integrations (E4/E6/E8 MCUs with Ethos-U85)
6. Added blog link to Ultralytics entry

README.md (top-level)

1. Updated Whisper link from external repo to local examples/models/whisper/README.md
2. Added Unsloth to Resources line for fine-tuned LLM deployment
3. Added Desktop Guide link for CUDA/Metal GPU inference

examples/models/whisper/README.md

1. Added Mobile Demo section with link to Android WhisperApp

website/index.html

1. Updated Whisper link to in-tree whisper README
2. Added Reality Labs blog link to Production Deployments
3. Added LiquidAI blog link to Ecosystem Integration
4. Added Software Mansion link to Ecosystem Integration

examples/qualcomm/oss_scripts/llama/README.md

1. Added YouTube video tutorial "Build Along: Run LLMs Locally on Qualcomm Hardware Using ExecuTorch"

docs/source/backends-cadence.md

1. Added Cadence blog link about running optimized PyTorch models on Cadence DSPs

docs/source/backends-cadence.md, after:

# Cadence Xtensa Backend


In this tutorial we will walk you through the process of getting setup to build ExecuTorch for Cadence Xtensa DSPs and running models on them.

[Cadence](https://www.cadence.com/en_US/home.html) is both a hardware and software vendor, providing solutions for many computational workloads, including to run on power-limited embedded devices. The Cadence backend supports multiple DSP families optimized for different workloads:
- **HiFi Audio DSPs** (HiFi4/HiFi5): Optimized for audio processing, speech recognition, and wake word detection
- **Fusion G3 DSPs**: General-purpose AI acceleration
- **Vision P-Series DSPs**: Specialized for computer vision and CNN workloads

In addition to the chip, the HiFi4 Neural Network Library ([nnlib](https://github.com/foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4)) offers an optimized set of library functions commonly used in NN processing that we utilize in this example to demonstrate how common operations can be accelerated.

For an overview of the Cadence ExecuTorch integration with performance benchmarks, see the blog post: [Running Optimized PyTorch Models on Cadence DSPs with ExecuTorch](https://community.cadence.com/cadence_blogs_8/b/ip/posts/running-optimized-pytorch-models-on-cadence-dsps-with-executorch).

On top of being able to run on the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP, another goal of this tutorial is to demonstrate how portable ExecuTorch is and its ability to run on a low-power embedded device such as the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP. This workflow does not require any delegates, it uses custom operators and compiler passes to enhance the model and make it more suitable to running on Xtensa HiFi4 DSPs. A custom [quantizer](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/quantization_in_pytorch_2_0_export_tutorial.html) is used to represent activations and weights as `uint8` instead of `float`, and call appropriate operators. Finally, custom kernels optimized with Xtensa intrinsics provide runtime acceleration.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item-card}  What you will learn in this tutorial:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
* In this tutorial you will learn how to export a quantized model with a linear operation targeted for the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP.
* You will also learn how to compile and deploy the ExecuTorch runtime with the kernels required for running the quantized model generated in the previous step on the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP.
:::
:::{grid-item-card}  Tutorials we recommend you complete before this:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
* [Introduction to ExecuTorch](intro-how-it-works.md)
* [Getting Started](getting-started.md)
* [Building ExecuTorch with CMake](using-executorch-building-from-source.md)
:::
::::

```{note}
The linux part of this tutorial has been designed and tested on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, and requires glibc 2.34. Workarounds are available for other distributions, but will not be covered in this tutorial.
```

## Prerequisites (Hardware and Software)

In order to be able to succesfully build and run ExecuTorch on a Xtensa HiFi4 DSP you'll need the following hardware and software components.

### Hardware
 - [i.MX RT600 Evaluation Kit](https://www.nxp.com/design/development-boards/i-mx-evaluation-and-development-boards/i-mx-rt600-evaluation-kit:MIMXRT685-EVK)

### Software
 - x86-64 Linux system (For compiling the DSP binaries)
 - [MCUXpresso IDE](https://www.nxp.com/design/software/development-software/mcuxpresso-software-and-tools-/mcuxpresso-integrated-development-environment-ide:MCUXpresso-IDE)
    - This IDE is supported on multiple platforms including MacOS. You can use it on any of the supported platforms as you'll only be using this to flash the board with the DSP images that you'll be building later on in this tutorial.
- [J-Link](https://www.segger.com/downloads/jlink/)
    - Needed to flash the board with the firmware images. You can install this on the same platform that you installed the MCUXpresso IDE on.
    - Note: depending on the version of the NXP board, another probe than JLink might be installed. In any case, flashing is done using the MCUXpresso IDE in a similar way.
 - [MCUXpresso SDK](https://mcuxpresso.nxp.com/en/select?device=EVK-MIMXRT685)
    - Download this SDK to your Linux machine, extract it and take a note of the path where you store it. You'll need this later.
- [Xtensa compiler](https://tensilicatools.com/platform/i-mx-rt600/)
    - Download this to your Linux machine. This is needed to build ExecuTorch for the HiFi4 DSP.
- For cases with optimized kernels, the [nnlib repo](https://github.com/foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4).

## Setting up Developer Environment

Step 1. In order to be able to successfully install all the software components specified above users will need to go through the NXP tutorial linked below. Although the tutorial itself walks through a Windows setup, most of the steps translate over to a Linux installation too.

[NXP tutorial on setting up the board and dev environment](https://www.nxp.com/document/guide/getting-started-with-i-mx-rt600-evaluation-kit:GS-MIMXRT685-EVK?section=plug-it-in)

```{note}
Before proceeding forward to the next section users should be able to succesfullly flash the **dsp_mu_polling_cm33** sample application from the tutorial above and notice output on the UART console indicating that the Cortex-M33 and HiFi4 DSP are talking to each other.
```

Step 2. Make sure you have completed the ExecuTorch setup tutorials linked to at the top of this page.

## Working Tree Description

The working tree is:

```
executorch
├── backends
│   └── cadence
│       ├── aot                      # Ahead-of-Time compilation tools
│       │   ├── compiler.py         # Main compilation API
│       │   ├── export_example.py   # Export workflow example
│       │   ├── quantizer/          # Quantization infrastructure
│       │   │   ├── quantizer.py    # Multiple quantizer implementations
│       │   │   ├── patterns.py     # Quantization patterns
│       │   │   └── fusion_pass.py  # Op fusion pass
│       │   ├── passes.py           # Graph optimization passes
│       │   ├── functions.yaml      # Generic operator definitions
│       │   ├── functions_hifi.yaml # HiFi-specific definitions
│       │   ├── functions_fusion_g3.yaml # Fusion G3 definitions
│       │   └── functions_vision.yaml # Vision-specific definitions
│       ├── runtime/                # Runtime execution infrastructure
│       ├── utils/                  # Build utilities (FACTO, header gen)
│       ├── hifi/                   # HiFi Audio DSP family (70+ ops)
│       │   ├── kernels            # Optimized HiFi4/HiFi5 kernels
│       │   ├── operators          # HiFi operator implementations
│       │   └── third-party
│       │       └── nnlib          # Cadence NNLIB integration
│       ├── fusion_g3/             # Fusion G3 DSP family (25+ ops)
│       │   ├── kernels
│       │   ├── operators
│       │   └── third-party
│       │       └── nnlib
│       ├── vision/                # Vision P-Series DSP family (17+ ops)
│       │   ├── kernels
│       │   ├── operators
│       │   └── third-party        # Vision-specific library
│       └── generic/               # Generic fallback implementations (15+ ops)
│           └── operators
└── examples
    └── cadence
        ├── models                 # 9 example models
        │   ├── rnnt_encoder.py   # ASR encoder (ConvEmformer)
        │   ├── rnnt_predictor.py # ASR predictor
        │   ├── rnnt_joiner.py    # ASR joiner
        │   ├── wav2vec2.py       # Self-supervised speech
        │   ├── mobilenet_v2.py   # Image classification
        │   ├── resnet18.py       # Image classification
        │   ├── resnet50.py       # Image classification
        │   ├── vision_transformer.py # ViT
        │   └── babyllama.py      # Small LLM
        └── operators             # Operator test examples
            ├── test_add_op.py    # Add operation tests
            ├── test_quantized_linear_op.py
            ├── test_quantized_conv1d_op.py
            ├── test_requantize_op.py
            └── test_g3_ops.py    # FACTO-based G3 tests
```

***AoT (Ahead-of-Time) Components***:

The AoT folder contains all of the python scripts and functions needed to export the model to an ExecuTorch `.pte` file. The main components include:

- **Compiler API** ([compiler.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/compiler.py)): High-level APIs for model compilation including `trace()`, `quantize_pt2()`, `export_to_edge()`, and `export_to_cadence()`.

- **Quantizer** ([quantizer/quantizer.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/quantizer/quantizer.py)): Multiple quantization strategies:
  - `CadenceDefaultQuantizer`: Standard A8W8 (8-bit asymmetric activations, 8-bit weights)
  - `CadenceWithLayerNormQuantizer`: Adds layer normalization support
  - `CadenceWakeWordQuantizer`: Optimized for audio wake word models
  - `CadenceW8A32MixedQuantizer`: Experimental mixed precision (8-bit weights, 32-bit activations)
  - `CadenceWithSoftmaxQuantizer`: Includes A16 (16-bit activation) softmax

- **Compiler Passes** ([passes.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/passes.py)): Graph optimization passes including operator fusion, replacement, simplification, and reordering.

- **Operator Registrations** ([ops_registrations.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/ops_registrations.py)): Registers 100+ custom Cadence operators with meta kernels for shape inference. Supports quantized operations for conv1d/2d, linear, matmul, layer norm, and more.

- **Export Example** ([export_example.py](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/aot/export_example.py)): Reference implementation demonstrating the complete export workflow from model to `.pte` file.

***DSP Family-Specific Implementations***:

Each DSP family has its own optimized operator and kernel implementations:

- **HiFi**: Extensive support for quantized convolutions (1D/2D, depthwise, dilated), linear, matmul, layer norm, ReLU, add, and more. Uses Cadence NNLIB for optimized primitives.

- **Fusion G3**: General-purpose operations including arithmetic (add, sub, mul, div), activations (sigmoid, tanh, softmax), layer normalization, and tensor manipulation.

- **Vision**: Vision-focused operations including quantized conv, linear, matmul, im2row transformation, and softmax with custom vision library.

- **Generic**: Reference implementations used as fallback when DSP-specific optimizations aren't available.

***Kernels***:

The kernels folders contain optimized implementations that use Xtensa intrinsics to deliver high performance at low power. Each DSP family has its own kernel implementations tuned for the specific architecture characteristics.

## Build

In this step, you will generate the ExecuTorch program from different models. You'll then use this Program (the `.pte` file) during the runtime build step to bake this Program into the DSP image.

### Model Export Examples

The Cadence backend provides multiple example models covering different use cases:

***Simple Model***:

The first, simple model is meant to test that all components of this tutorial are working properly, and simply does an add operation. The generated file is called `add.pte`.

```bash
cd executorch
python3 -m examples.portable.scripts.export --model_name="add"
```

***Quantized Operators***:

Test individual quantized operations:

- **Quantized Linear**: [Linear](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Linear.html) operation (32→16 features). Linear is the backbone of most ASR models.
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.operators.test_quantized_linear_op
  ```

- **Quantized Conv1D**: [Conv1d](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Conv1d.html) operation (8→16 channels). Important for wake word and denoising models.
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.operators.test_quantized_conv1d_op
  ```

- **Requantize Operation**: Tests dtype conversion between different quantized types.
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.operators.test_requantize_op
  ```

In all cases the generated file is called `CadenceDemoModel.pte`.

***Speech/Audio Models***:

The torchaudio [RNNT-emformer](https://pytorch.org/audio/stable/tutorials/online_asr_tutorial.html) model is an Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) model, comprised of three different submodels:

- **RNNT Predictor**: Sequence of basic ops (embedding, ReLU, linear, layer norm)
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.rnnt_predictor
  ```

- **RNNT Encoder**: ConvEmformer-based encoder with time reduction and transformer layers
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.rnnt_encoder
  ```

- **RNNT Joiner**: Joint network combining encoder and predictor outputs
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.rnnt_joiner
  ```

- **Wav2Vec 2.0**: Self-supervised speech representation model
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.wav2vec2
  ```

***Computer Vision Models***:

- **MobileNet V2**: Efficient image classification
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.mobilenet_v2
  ```

- **ResNet-18**: Image classification
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.resnet18
  ```

- **ResNet-50**: Deeper image classification
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.resnet50
  ```

- **Vision Transformer (ViT)**: Transformer-based vision model
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.vision_transformer
  ```

***Language Model***:

- **Baby LLaMA**: Small LLM for testing transformer operations on DSP
  ```bash
  python3 -m examples.cadence.models.babyllama
  ```

All model exports generate `CadenceDemoModel.pte` files ready for deployment.

### Runtime

**Building the DSP firmware image**
In this step, you'll be building the DSP firmware image that consists of the sample ExecuTorch runner along with the Program generated from the previous step. This image when loaded onto the DSP will run through the model that this Program consists of.

***Step 1***. Configure the environment variables needed to point to the Xtensa toolchain that you have installed in the previous step. The three environment variables that need to be set include:
```bash
# Directory in which the Xtensa toolchain was installed
export XTENSA_TOOLCHAIN=/home/user_name/cadence/XtDevTools/install/tools
# The version of the toolchain that was installed. This is essentially the name of the directory
# that is present in the XTENSA_TOOLCHAIN directory from above.
export TOOLCHAIN_VER=RI-2023.11-linux
# The Xtensa core that you're targeting.
# For HiFi4 (NXP RT600):
export XTENSA_CORE=VANILLA_HIFI
# For Fusion G3:
# export XTENSA_CORE=VANILLA_G3
# For Vision P6:
# export XTENSA_CORE=VANILLA_VISION
```

```{note}
The Cadence backend supports multiple DSP families:
- **HiFi Audio DSPs** (HiFi4/HiFi5): Core `VANILLA_HIFI`, enable with `-DEXECUTORCH_NNLIB_OPT=ON`
- **Fusion G3 DSPs**: Core `VANILLA_G3`, enable with `-DEXECUTORCH_FUSION_G3_OPT=ON`
- **Vision P-Series DSPs**: Core `VANILLA_VISION`, enable with `-DEXECUTORCH_VISION_OPT=ON`
```

***Step 2***. Clone the [nnlib repo](https://github.com/foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4), which contains optimized kernels and primitives for HiFi4 DSPs, with `git clone git@github.com:foss-xtensa/nnlib-hifi4.git`.

***Step 3***. Run the CMake build.
In order to run the CMake build, you need the path to the following:
- The Program generated in the previous step
- Path to the NXP SDK root. This should have been installed already in the [Setting up Developer Environment](#setting-up-developer-environment) section. This is the directory that contains the folders such as boards, components, devices, and other.

```bash
cd executorch
./install_executorch.sh --clean
mkdir cmake-out
# prebuild and install executorch library
cmake -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=<path_to_executorch>/backends/cadence/cadence.cmake \
    -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=cmake-out \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug \
    -DPYTHON_EXECUTABLE=python3 \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXTENSION_RUNNER_UTIL=ON \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_EXECUTOR_RUNNER=OFF \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_PTHREADPOOL=OFF \
    -DEXECUTORCH_BUILD_CPUINFO=OFF \
    -Bcmake-out .

cmake --build cmake-out -j<num_cores> --target install --config Debug
# build cadence runner
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug \
    -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=<path_to_executorch>/examples/backends/cadence.cmake \
    -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=<path_to_executorch>/cmake-out \
    -DMODEL_PATH=<path_to_program_file_generated_in_previous_step> \
    -DNXP_SDK_ROOT_DIR=<path_to_nxp_sdk_root> \
    -DNN_LIB_BASE_DIR=<path_to_nnlib_cloned_in_step_2> \
    -Bcmake-out/examples/cadence \
    examples/cadence

cmake --build cmake-out/examples/cadence -j8 -t cadence_executorch_example
```

After having succesfully run the above step you should see two binary files in their CMake output directory.
```bash
> ls cmake-xt/*.bin
cmake-xt/dsp_data_release.bin  cmake-xt/dsp_text_release.bin
```

## Deploying and Running on Device

***Step 1***. You now take the DSP binary images generated from the previous step and copy them over into your NXP workspace created in the [Setting up  Developer Environment](#setting-up-developer-environment) section. Copy the DSP images into the `dsp_binary` section highlighted in the image below.

![MCUXpresso IDE](_static/img/dsp_binary.png)

```{note}
As long as binaries have been built using the Xtensa toolchain on Linux, flashing the board and running on the chip can be done only with the MCUXpresso IDE, which is available on all platforms (Linux, MacOS, Windows).
```

***Step 2***. Clean your work space

***Step 3***. Click **Debug your Project** which will flash the board with your binaries.

On the UART console connected to your board (at a default baud rate of 115200), you should see an output similar to this:

```bash
> screen /dev/tty.usbmodem0007288234991 115200
Executed model
Model executed successfully.
First 20 elements of output 0
0.165528   0.331055 ...
```

## Conclusion and Future Work

In this tutorial, you have learned how to export a quantized operation, build the ExecuTorch runtime and run this model on the Xtensa HiFi4 DSP chip.

The (quantized linear) model in this tutorial is a typical operation appearing in ASR models, and can be extended to a complete ASR model by creating the model as a new test and adding the needed operators/kernels to [operators](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/hifi/operators) and [kernels](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/backends/cadence/hifi/kernels).

Other models can be created following the same structure, always assuming that operators and kernels are available.
