docs/source/tutorial-arm-ethos-u.md, before:

# Arm Ethos-U NPU Backend Tutorial

<!----This will show a grid card on the page----->
::::{grid} 2

:::{grid-item-card}  Tutorials we recommend you complete before this:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
* [Introduction to ExecuTorch](intro-how-it-works.md)
* [Getting Started](getting-started.md)
* [Building ExecuTorch with CMake](using-executorch-building-from-source.md)
:::

:::{grid-item-card}  What you will learn in this tutorial:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
In this tutorial you will learn how to export a simple PyTorch model for the ExecuTorch Ethos-U backend.
:::

::::

```{warning}
This delegate is under active development, to get best results please use a recent version.
The TOSA and Ethos-U backend support is reasonably mature and used in production by some users.
You may encounter some rough edges and features which may be documented or planned but not implemented, please refer to the in-tree documentation for the latest status of features.
```

```{tip}
If you are already familiar with this delegate, you may want to jump directly to the examples:
* [Examples in the ExecuTorch repository](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/tree/main/examples/arm)
* [A commandline compiler for example models](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/examples/arm/aot_arm_compiler.py)
```

This tutorial serves as an introduction to using ExecuTorch to deploy PyTorch models on Arm&reg; Ethos&trade;-U targets. It is based on `ethos_u_minimal_example.ipynb`, provided in Arm’s examples folder.

## Prerequisites

### Hardware

To successfully complete this tutorial, you will need a Linux machine with aarch64 or x86_64 processor architecture, or a macOS&trade; machine with Apple&reg; Silicon.

To enable development without a specific development board, we will be using a [Fixed Virtual Platform (FVP)](https://www.arm.com/products/development-tools/simulation/fixed-virtual-platforms), simulating [Arm&reg; Corstone&trade;-300](https://developer.arm.com/Processors/Corstone-300)(cs300) and [Arm&reg; Corstone&trade;-300](https://developer.arm.com/Processors/Corstone-320)(cs320)systems. Think of it as virtual hardware.

### Software

First, you will need to install ExecuTorch. Please follow the recommended tutorials to set up a working ExecuTorch development environment.

In addition to this, you need to install a number of SDK dependencies for generating Ethos-U command streams. Scripts to automate this are available in the main [ExecuTorch repository](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/tree/main/examples/arm/).
To install Ethos-U dependencies, run
```bash
./examples/arm/setup.sh --i-agree-to-the-contained-eula
```
This will install:
- [TOSA Serialization Library](https://www.mlplatform.org/tosa/software.html) for serializing the Exir IR graph into TOSA IR.
- [Ethos-U Vela graph compiler](https://pypi.org/project/ethos-u-vela/) for compiling TOSA flatbuffers into a Ethos-U command stream.
- [Arm GNU Toolchain](https://developer.arm.com/Tools%20and%20Software/GNU%20Toolchain) for cross compilation.
- [Corstone SSE-300 FVP](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/100966/1128/Arm--Corstone-SSE-300-FVP) for testing on Ethos-U55 reference design.
- [Corstone SSE-320 FVP](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/109760/0000/SSE-320-FVP) for testing on Ethos-U85 reference design.

## Set Up the Developer Environment

The setup.sh script generates a setup_path.sh script that you need to source whenever you restart your shell. Run:

```{bash}
source  examples/arm/ethos-u-scratch/setup_path.sh
```

As a simple check that your environment is set up correctly, run `which FVP_Corstone_SSE-320` and make sure that the executable is located where you expect, in the `examples/arm` tree.

## Build

### Ahead-of-Time (AOT) components

The ExecuTorch Ahead-of-Time (AOT) pipeline takes a PyTorch Model (a `torch.nn.Module`) and produces a `.pte` binary file, which is then consumed by the ExecuTorch Runtime. This [document](getting-started-architecture.md) goes in much more depth about the ExecuTorch software stack for both AoT as well as Runtime.

The example below shows how to quantize a model consisting of a single addition, and export it it through the AOT flow using the EthosU backend. For more details, see `examples/arm/ethos_u_minimal_example.ipynb`.

```python
import torch

class Add(torch.nn.Module):
    def forward(self, x: torch.Tensor, y: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
        return x + y

example_inputs = (torch.ones(1,1,1,1),torch.ones(1,1,1,1))

model = Add()
model = model.eval()
exported_program = torch.export.export(model, example_inputs)
graph_module = exported_program.module()


from executorch.backends.arm.ethosu import EthosUCompileSpec
from executorch.backends.arm.quantizer import (
    EthosUQuantizer,
    get_symmetric_quantization_config,
)
from torchao.quantization.pt2e.quantize_pt2e import convert_pt2e, prepare_pt2e

# Create a compilation spec describing the target for configuring the quantizer
# Some args are used by the Arm Vela graph compiler later in the example. Refer to Arm Vela documentation for an
# explanation of its flags: https://gitlab.arm.com/artificial-intelligence/ethos-u/ethos-u-vela/-/blob/main/OPTIONS.md
compile_spec = EthosUCompileSpec(
            target="ethos-u55-128",
            system_config="Ethos_U55_High_End_Embedded",
            memory_mode="Shared_Sram",
            extra_flags=["--output-format=raw", "--debug-force-regor"]
        )

# Create and configure quantizer to use a symmetric quantization config globally on all nodes
quantizer = EthosUQuantizer(compile_spec)
operator_config = get_symmetric_quantization_config()
quantizer.set_global(operator_config)

# Post training quantization
quantized_graph_module = prepare_pt2e(graph_module, quantizer)
quantized_graph_module(*example_inputs) # Calibrate the graph module with the example input
quantized_graph_module = convert_pt2e(quantized_graph_module)


# Create a new exported program using the quantized_graph_module
quantized_exported_program = torch.export.export(quantized_graph_module, example_inputs)
from executorch.backends.arm.ethosu import EthosUPartitioner
from executorch.exir import (
    EdgeCompileConfig,
    ExecutorchBackendConfig,
    to_edge_transform_and_lower,
)
from executorch.extension.export_util.utils import save_pte_program

# Create partitioner from compile spec
partitioner = EthosUPartitioner(compile_spec)

# Lower the exported program to the Ethos-U backend
edge_program_manager = to_edge_transform_and_lower(
            quantized_exported_program,
            partitioner=[partitioner],
            compile_config=EdgeCompileConfig(
                _check_ir_validity=False,
            ),
        )

# Convert edge program to executorch
executorch_program_manager = edge_program_manager.to_executorch(
            config=ExecutorchBackendConfig(extract_delegate_segments=False)
        )


# Save pte file
save_pte_program(executorch_program_manager, "ethos_u_minimal_example.pte")
```


```{tip}
For a quick start, you can use the script `examples/arm/aot_arm_compiler.py` to produce the pte.
To produce a pte file equivalent to the one above, run
`python -m examples.arm.aot_arm_compiler --model_name=add --delegate --quantize --output=ethos_u_minimal_example.pte`
```

### Runtime:

After the AOT compilation flow is done, the runtime can be cross compiled and linked to the produced `.pte`-file using the Arm cross-compilation toolchain. This is done in two steps:

First, build and install the ExecuTorch libraries and EthosUDelegate:
```
# In ExecuTorch top-level, with sourced setup_path.sh
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release --preset arm-baremetal -B cmake-out-arm .
cmake --build cmake-out-arm --target install -j$(nproc)
```
Second, build and link the `arm_executor_runner` and generate kernel bindings for any non delegated ops. This is the actual program that will run on target.

```
# In ExecuTorch top-level, with sourced setup_path.sh
cmake -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=`pwd`/examples/arm/ethos-u-setup/arm-none-eabi-gcc.cmake \
      -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
      -DET_PTE_FILE_PATH=ethos_u_minimal_example.pte \
      -DTARGET_CPU=cortex-m55 \
      -DETHOSU_TARGET_NPU_CONFIG=ethos-u55-128 \
      -DMEMORY_MODE=Shared_Sram \
      -DSYSTEM_CONFIG=Ethos_U55_High_End_Embedded \
      -Bethos_u_minimal_example \
      examples/arm/executor_runner
cmake --build ethos_u_minimal_example -j$(nproc) -- arm_executor_runner
```

```{tip}
For a quick start, you can use the script `backends/arm/scripts/build_executor_runner.sh` to build the runner.
To build a runner equivalent to the one above, run
`./backends/arm/scripts/build_executor_runner.sh --pte=ethos_u_minimal_example.pte`
````

The block diagram below shows, at the high level, how the various build artifacts are generated and are linked together to generate the final bare-metal executable.

![](arm-delegate-runtime-build.svg)



## Running on Corstone FVP Platforms

Finally, use the `backends/arm/scripts/run_fvp.sh` utility script to run the .elf-file on simulated Arm hardware.
```
backends/arm/scripts/run_fvp.sh --elf=$(find ethos_u_minimal_example -name arm_executor_runner) --target=ethos-u55-128
```
The example application is by default built with an input of ones, so the expected result of the quantized addition should be close to 2.


## Takeaways

In this tutorial you have learned how to use ExecuTorch to export a PyTorch model to an executable that can run on an embedded target, and then run that executable on simulated hardware.
To learn more, check out these learning paths:

https://learn.arm.com/learning-paths/embedded-and-microcontrollers/rpi-llama3/
https://learn.arm.com/learning-paths/embedded-and-microcontrollers/visualizing-ethos-u-performance/

## FAQs

If you encountered any bugs or issues following this tutorial please file a bug/issue here on [Github](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/issues/new).


```
Arm is a registered trademark of Arm Limited (or its subsidiaries or affiliates).
```

Commit message:

solve arm call_module issue (#14524)
Summary: Pull Request resolved: https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/pull/14524

Differential Revision: D83073648

docs/source/tutorial-arm-ethos-u.md, after:

# Arm Ethos-U NPU Backend Tutorial

<!----This will show a grid card on the page----->
::::{grid} 2

:::{grid-item-card}  Tutorials we recommend you complete before this:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
* [Introduction to ExecuTorch](intro-how-it-works.md)
* [Getting Started](getting-started.md)
* [Building ExecuTorch with CMake](using-executorch-building-from-source.md)
:::

:::{grid-item-card}  What you will learn in this tutorial:
:class-card: card-prerequisites
In this tutorial you will learn how to export a simple PyTorch model for the ExecuTorch Ethos-U backend.
:::

::::

```{warning}
This delegate is under active development, to get best results please use a recent version.
The TOSA and Ethos-U backend support is reasonably mature and used in production by some users.
You may encounter some rough edges and features which may be documented or planned but not implemented, please refer to the in-tree documentation for the latest status of features.
```

```{tip}
If you are already familiar with this delegate, you may want to jump directly to the examples:
* [Examples in the ExecuTorch repository](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/tree/main/examples/arm)
* [A commandline compiler for example models](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/blob/main/examples/arm/aot_arm_compiler.py)
```

This tutorial serves as an introduction to using ExecuTorch to deploy PyTorch models on Arm&reg; Ethos&trade;-U targets. It is based on `ethos_u_minimal_example.ipynb`, provided in Arm’s examples folder.

## Prerequisites

### Hardware

To successfully complete this tutorial, you will need a Linux machine with aarch64 or x86_64 processor architecture, or a macOS&trade; machine with Apple&reg; Silicon.

To enable development without a specific development board, we will be using a [Fixed Virtual Platform (FVP)](https://www.arm.com/products/development-tools/simulation/fixed-virtual-platforms), simulating [Arm&reg; Corstone&trade;-300](https://developer.arm.com/Processors/Corstone-300)(cs300) and [Arm&reg; Corstone&trade;-300](https://developer.arm.com/Processors/Corstone-320)(cs320)systems. Think of it as virtual hardware.

### Software

First, you will need to install ExecuTorch. Please follow the recommended tutorials to set up a working ExecuTorch development environment.

In addition to this, you need to install a number of SDK dependencies for generating Ethos-U command streams. Scripts to automate this are available in the main [ExecuTorch repository](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/tree/main/examples/arm/).
To install Ethos-U dependencies, run
```bash
./examples/arm/setup.sh --i-agree-to-the-contained-eula
```
This will install:
- [TOSA Serialization Library](https://www.mlplatform.org/tosa/software.html) for serializing the Exir IR graph into TOSA IR.
- [Ethos-U Vela graph compiler](https://pypi.org/project/ethos-u-vela/) for compiling TOSA flatbuffers into a Ethos-U command stream.
- [Arm GNU Toolchain](https://developer.arm.com/Tools%20and%20Software/GNU%20Toolchain) for cross compilation.
- [Corstone SSE-300 FVP](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/100966/1128/Arm--Corstone-SSE-300-FVP) for testing on Ethos-U55 reference design.
- [Corstone SSE-320 FVP](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/109760/0000/SSE-320-FVP) for testing on Ethos-U85 reference design.

## Set Up the Developer Environment

The setup.sh script generates a setup_path.sh script that you need to source whenever you restart your shell. Run:

```{bash}
source  examples/arm/ethos-u-scratch/setup_path.sh
```

As a simple check that your environment is set up correctly, run `which FVP_Corstone_SSE-320` and make sure that the executable is located where you expect, in the `examples/arm` tree.

## Build

### Ahead-of-Time (AOT) components

The ExecuTorch Ahead-of-Time (AOT) pipeline takes a PyTorch Model (a `torch.nn.Module`) and produces a `.pte` binary file, which is then consumed by the ExecuTorch Runtime. This [document](getting-started-architecture.md) goes in much more depth about the ExecuTorch software stack for both AoT as well as Runtime.

The example below shows how to quantize a model consisting of a single addition, and export it it through the AOT flow using the EthosU backend. For more details, see `examples/arm/ethos_u_minimal_example.ipynb`.

```python
import torch

class Add(torch.nn.Module):
    def forward(self, x: torch.Tensor, y: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
        return x + y

example_inputs = (torch.ones(1,1,1,1),torch.ones(1,1,1,1))

model = Add()
model = model.eval()
exported_program = torch.export.export(model, example_inputs)
# Use check_guards=False to avoid creating _guards_fn modules that contain call_module nodes
# which are not supported by ExecuTorch ARM passes during quantization
graph_module = exported_program.module(check_guards=False)


from executorch.backends.arm.ethosu import EthosUCompileSpec
from executorch.backends.arm.quantizer import (
    EthosUQuantizer,
    get_symmetric_quantization_config,
)
from torchao.quantization.pt2e.quantize_pt2e import convert_pt2e, prepare_pt2e

# Create a compilation spec describing the target for configuring the quantizer
# Some args are used by the Arm Vela graph compiler later in the example. Refer to Arm Vela documentation for an
# explanation of its flags: https://gitlab.arm.com/artificial-intelligence/ethos-u/ethos-u-vela/-/blob/main/OPTIONS.md
compile_spec = EthosUCompileSpec(
            target="ethos-u55-128",
            system_config="Ethos_U55_High_End_Embedded",
            memory_mode="Shared_Sram",
            extra_flags=["--output-format=raw", "--debug-force-regor"]
        )

# Create and configure quantizer to use a symmetric quantization config globally on all nodes
quantizer = EthosUQuantizer(compile_spec)
operator_config = get_symmetric_quantization_config()
quantizer.set_global(operator_config)

# Post training quantization
quantized_graph_module = prepare_pt2e(graph_module, quantizer)
quantized_graph_module(*example_inputs) # Calibrate the graph module with the example input
quantized_graph_module = convert_pt2e(quantized_graph_module)


# Create a new exported program using the quantized_graph_module
quantized_exported_program = torch.export.export(quantized_graph_module, example_inputs)
from executorch.backends.arm.ethosu import EthosUPartitioner
from executorch.exir import (
    EdgeCompileConfig,
    ExecutorchBackendConfig,
    to_edge_transform_and_lower,
)
from executorch.extension.export_util.utils import save_pte_program

# Create partitioner from compile spec
partitioner = EthosUPartitioner(compile_spec)

# Lower the exported program to the Ethos-U backend
edge_program_manager = to_edge_transform_and_lower(
            quantized_exported_program,
            partitioner=[partitioner],
            compile_config=EdgeCompileConfig(
                _check_ir_validity=False,
            ),
        )

# Convert edge program to executorch
executorch_program_manager = edge_program_manager.to_executorch(
            config=ExecutorchBackendConfig(extract_delegate_segments=False)
        )


# Save pte file
save_pte_program(executorch_program_manager, "ethos_u_minimal_example.pte")
```


```{tip}
For a quick start, you can use the script `examples/arm/aot_arm_compiler.py` to produce the pte.
To produce a pte file equivalent to the one above, run
`python -m examples.arm.aot_arm_compiler --model_name=add --delegate --quantize --output=ethos_u_minimal_example.pte`
```

### Runtime:

After the AOT compilation flow is done, the runtime can be cross compiled and linked to the produced `.pte`-file using the Arm cross-compilation toolchain. This is done in two steps:

First, build and install the ExecuTorch libraries and EthosUDelegate:
```
# In ExecuTorch top-level, with sourced setup_path.sh
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release --preset arm-baremetal -B cmake-out-arm .
cmake --build cmake-out-arm --target install -j$(nproc)
```
Second, build and link the `arm_executor_runner` and generate kernel bindings for any non delegated ops. This is the actual program that will run on target.

```
# In ExecuTorch top-level, with sourced setup_path.sh
cmake -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=`pwd`/examples/arm/ethos-u-setup/arm-none-eabi-gcc.cmake \
      -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
      -DET_PTE_FILE_PATH=ethos_u_minimal_example.pte \
      -DTARGET_CPU=cortex-m55 \
      -DETHOSU_TARGET_NPU_CONFIG=ethos-u55-128 \
      -DMEMORY_MODE=Shared_Sram \
      -DSYSTEM_CONFIG=Ethos_U55_High_End_Embedded \
      -Bethos_u_minimal_example \
      examples/arm/executor_runner
cmake --build ethos_u_minimal_example -j$(nproc) -- arm_executor_runner
```

```{tip}
For a quick start, you can use the script `backends/arm/scripts/build_executor_runner.sh` to build the runner.
To build a runner equivalent to the one above, run
`./backends/arm/scripts/build_executor_runner.sh --pte=ethos_u_minimal_example.pte`
````

The block diagram below shows, at the high level, how the various build artifacts are generated and are linked together to generate the final bare-metal executable.

![](arm-delegate-runtime-build.svg)



## Running on Corstone FVP Platforms

Finally, use the `backends/arm/scripts/run_fvp.sh` utility script to run the .elf-file on simulated Arm hardware.
```
backends/arm/scripts/run_fvp.sh --elf=$(find ethos_u_minimal_example -name arm_executor_runner) --target=ethos-u55-128
```
The example application is by default built with an input of ones, so the expected result of the quantized addition should be close to 2.


## Takeaways

In this tutorial you have learned how to use ExecuTorch to export a PyTorch model to an executable that can run on an embedded target, and then run that executable on simulated hardware.
To learn more, check out these learning paths:

https://learn.arm.com/learning-paths/embedded-and-microcontrollers/rpi-llama3/
https://learn.arm.com/learning-paths/embedded-and-microcontrollers/visualizing-ethos-u-performance/

## FAQs

If you encountered any bugs or issues following this tutorial please file a bug/issue here on [Github](https://github.com/pytorch/executorch/issues/new).


```
Arm is a registered trademark of Arm Limited (or its subsidiaries or affiliates).
```
